If you didn't know already how to do it, here's how to change trailer, ATV, lawn tractor,
motorcycle, you know, and small vehicle tires just with a couple of screwdrivers or something
like that. They all work pretty much the same way.
First of all, there's three kinds of bead styles.
The first bead style is the tube style tire. It doesn't have very much of a bump or anything
on the inside of the rim to lock the rubber bead of the tire to the outside of the rim.
It just can be slipped right off by just stepping on the edge of the tire and it'll separate
the tire from the edge of the rim.
Tubeless tire design like car tires and many other things have a partially locking sealing
system to bead to rim and they're more difficult to separate. You may need to squish the tire
in a vice, press it in a tire machine, or place the tire you're going to change right
in front of the wheel of a vehicle and slowly drive over the rubber part close to the rim
and that may break it for you.
It's usually stupid to try to beat it with a big hammer. You'll usually end up wrecking
your rim.
Another method is put the rubber part of the tire on your face of your jack and put it
underneath a high vehicle or something heavy and start jacking it up and that will create
a lot of pressure and a squishing edge to break the bead.
So once that's done, the way you change a tire is I like to set the nipple for the air
fill at least to that side or that side and start there. So you step on your tire and
you get the bead to drop to the lowest pocket inside your rim.
Then you get a pair of shoe divers and if you have no tube in there, you don't have
to worry, but if you have a tube, you have to be very careful not to prick your tube.
It's sometimes very important not to have that nipple either on the business area here
or where you're working, where you're starting. It gets in the way and it sometimes causes
you not to be able to get your bead to drop deeply into the pocket or if you have a tube,
it causes your tube to stick up there somewhat and your shoe diver will catch it and damage
it.
So now I've got it stepped on and I've got my screwdiver carefully in there in case there's
a tube and I've got a lip pried up. Then I just get some soapy water or spray nine or
something like that and I lube the edges like so.
Now by taking small bites of the tire at a time, I start to unpeel it while still keeping
the pressure on the other side to keep the bead into the deep groove. It may be also
necessary sometimes to, say for example, pinch your rim a little bit with a vice grip right
there to stop the tire from slipping around at the same time you're unpeeling it off or
peeling it back on.
Well that took about one minute and it's all peeled. If you have a tube type tire, you
only have to peel one side off. You can just lift your tire up and get enough space in
there to get your hand in there and get out the tube. If you want to completely take the
tire off the rim, it's best to just flip it over like I did now and work from the back
side and stick your shoedivers here and there and pry the tire off that way. The second
side always comes off a lot easier.
My tire had a tube in it. That's the way I want it to be. But when you're installing
new tubes or even putting the old one back in, tubes very often have a right or left
side unless they're on a motorcycle. So that means the nipple is more off-center. And if
you put it in backwards, it may go in fine. As soon as you start blowing it up, all of
a sudden it'll suck itself in and you can't get a hold of the nipple anymore. And you've
got your tire all put back together. The only way to get your tire back apart is actually
put a hole in it and bleed the air out and start all over again, then patch your hole
if you put the tube in upside down. So that sucks.
To put it back on, I've got the valve stem over there, the vice grip opposite to it.
Now I'm going to stand as best as I can here. Sometimes it takes two people. Get that lip
into the deep groove and then get my shoediver and work this all the way around and slowly
peel it on by small amounts at a time. And that just went on in 30 seconds. Of course,
sometimes it takes longer. Now, especially on quad tires, to reseal the bead takes a
lot of pressure because it's that high-pressure locking bead because it's a low-pressure tire.
So my advice is to put spray nine or soapy water all the way around both sides of the
bead and then put your lots of air pressure in. And even park it in the sun because warming
it up helps it slip on too. And it's done. It's actually pretty easy. No use paying someone
25 bucks or something. It's just basic tools and a little bit of weight.
Last thing, I didn't mention that I took that quad tire to a shop and had them use their
machine to break the bead. ATV tires or quad tires are very low pressure so they don't
use air to give a tight fit to lock the bead to the rim. They have a bead locking design
which is very difficult to break the bead. The other methods I showed and talked about
probably won't work. So if you don't have one of those kind of machines, you better
go to a place and have someone break the bead for you. They have this kind of high-pressure
locking bead because the tires are low pressure and if you're doing hard cornering, you don't
want the tire to all of a sudden flip off the rim and then roll your machine.